---
title: 3. THE DOCTRINE OF OFFENSE.
description: 
---

The sin of tempting any one to evil, Scripture describes as giving offense, Rom. 16, 17. For one to give offense means to teach or do anything by which another is occasioned either not to believe or to believe error or to lead a wicked life, so that his faith is either endangered or even destroyed. For this reason Scripture warns us most solemnly against the crime of giving offense, Matt. 18, 6ff.; Mark 9, 42ff.; Luke 17, 1. 2.

However, according to Scripture, offense is given not only by doing that which is evil (false doctrine, wicked life), but also through the unwise use of adiaphora (Rom. 14: eating meat, drinking wine); for in this way weak brethren may be occasioned to do something which their erring consciences regard as wrong. Rom. 14, 20: "It is evil for that man who eateth with offense"; 14,23: "He that doubteth is damned if he eat because he eateth not of faith." A Christian should not entertain erroneous views concerning adiaphora, Rom. 14, 14. 22; nevertheless, if, being a weak Christian, he has not the right knowledge, 1 Cor. 8, 7, he must under no circumstances do what he regards as wrong, Rom. 14, 15. 21. 23.

From this follows the general rule of Christian conduct that believers must at all times be willing to yield their Christian liberty unless the truth of the Gospel is at stake, Gal. 5, 1. 12. But if a person who claims to be weak in Christian knowledge demands that his error should be acknowledged as truth and insists upon promulgating it as such, he is no longer a "weak brother," whose "weakness" can be tolerated, but a false prophet, who judges and condemns true believers for using their right knowledge, Col. 2, 16; Gal. 5, 1-3. If a person takes offense because a confessing Christian is compelled to use his Christian liberty on account of the confession involved, no guilt attaches to such a Christian for using his liberty for the Gospel's sake. The guilt rather attaches to those who compel the true Christian to insist upon his liberty, Gal. 2, 4. 5; cp. with Acts 16, 3.

On the basis of Scripture we rightly distinguish between an offense which is given and one which is taken. An offense is taken when a person who is spiritually blind and corrupt takes occasion to sin from words or acts which in themselves are right. Thus the Jews were offended at Christ and His Gospel because of their self-righteousness, Rom. 9, 32, while the Gentiles were offended at Christ Crucified because of their carnal pride, 1 Cor. 1, 22. 23. This type of offense will continue till the end of time, Luke 2, 34; Rom. 9, 33; 1 Pet. 2, 8. Christians are offended at Christ when they renounce Him because of the suffering which His confession entails, Matt. 24, 10; 13, 21. It is for this reason that Christ so earnestly warns His followers : "Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in Me," Matt. 11, 6.