---
title: 14. THE EXTERNAL MEANS BY WHICH SACRED THEOLOGY ACCOMPLISHES ITS PURPOSE OF SAVING SINNERS. 
description: Hence the only means by which the Christian theologian can accomplish his preeminent, divinely prescribed purpose of saving sinners unto eternal life is the Gospel of Christ.
---

The external means which the Christian theologian employs to accomplish the salvation of sinners are not the carnal weapons suggested by man's wisdom, such as external coercion, the sword of the civil government, legal enactments, social service, the perfecting of church organization, etc. On such things theologians are prone to rely if they are guided by principles of reason, as the history of the Christian Church proves. Erring theologians within the Christian Church have always advocated carnal means to maintain and spread church power. Holy Scripture, however, condemns these means, not only as unprofitable, but as even downright injurious. For all of them are based upon the Law; and while the Law can check the gross outbursts of sin and improve the sinner outwardly, it cannot change his heart by producing in it true faith in Christ. But where there is no true faith in Christ, there is also no salvation. Hence the only means by which the Christian theologian can accomplish his preeminent, divinely prescribed purpose of saving sinners unto eternal life is the Gospel of Christ. Matt. 28, 19. 20: "Go ye therefore and make disciples of all nations by baptizing them ... , teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." Mark 16, 15: "Preach the Gospel to every creature." Acts 20, 32 : "I commend you ... to the Word of His grace, which is able to build you up." 2 Tim. 3, 15: "Thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation." Rom. 10, 17: "Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God." These divine injunctions of Holy Scripture the Christian theologian must constantly bear in mind in order that he may not be misled toward relying on any means suggested and advanced by his carnal heart, but may exclusively employ the powerful, living Word of God, by which alone sinners are transformed into children of God and governed and kept through faith unto salvation. In the Christian Church, as in the entire activity of the Christian theologian, the Word oi God must rule alone. It is the only efficacious means of grace because it alone is prescribed by God. Luther very correctly declares: "Christians cannot be ruled by any other means than by the Word of God; for Christians must be ruled by faith, not by external measures. Faith, however, can come only through God's Word, not through any word of man, as St. Paul teaches, Rom. 10, 17: 'Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God.'" (St. L., X, 406.) Let the Christian theologian, then, rely alone on God's Word for the successful execution of the work of the holy ministry; for it alone is the imperishable foundation of Christ's holy Church. Cp. 1 Cor. 3,10-14.