---
title: 18. THEOLOGY AND ACADEMIC FREEDOM. 
description: The official teachers of the Church, both in the pulpit and in the lecture chair, should be invested with full academic freedom.
---

Modern rationalistic theology demands that the official teachers of the Church, both in the pulpit and in the lecture chair, should be invested with full academic freedom. That is to say, they should be allowed to assert their subjective opinions, without any restrictions whatsoever; even Holy Scripture must not be forced upon them as the only source and standard of the faith which they are to inculcate. The ancient Christian rule that in the Christian Church the Word of God alone must be taught is rejected as "servitude of the letter," "unworthy academic coercion," "legalism," etc. (Buch8tabenknechtschaft, unwuerdiger Lehrzwang, gesetzlicher Geist usw.). However, this demand for academic freedom is in direct opposition to Holy Scripture; it is a freedom that is carnal .and ungodly, since it involves full scope to criticize, condemn, and reject the Word of God. The academic freedom which modern rationalistic theology seeks for itself must therefore be repudiated as anti christian and atheistic; for it insists upon freedom from -God and Christ.

As a matter of fact the true freedom of a Christian consists in this, that he has been liberated from his own sin-bound will and has become a servant of Jesus Christ. Rom. 6, 22: "But now being made free from sin and become servants of God." The essence of true Christian liberty is therefore loyalty, obedience, and subjection to the Word of the Lord. John 8, 31. 32: "If ye continue in My Word, then are ye My disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." As soon as the theologian relinquishes the Word of God as his only source and norm, he ceases to be a δοῦλος Χριστοῦ and becomes a slave of men. Then he has not obtained freedom at all, but has excllanged the holy service of Christ for the unholy thraldom of human opinions, views, and judgments; in place of the divine Master he now serves a human taskmaster, even if this taskmaster is only his own carnal heart. How wrong it is for a theologian to demand freedom to teach his subjective views in place of the infallible Word of God becomes clear as we carefully consider what Holy Scripture teaches with respect to this.

## a.
The Word of God affirms that the Christian Church till the end of time has only one Teacher, Christ Jesus, the Son of God. Matt. 23, 8: "But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren." As the one Master, or Teacher, Christ commanded His apostles to teach all nations all things whatsoever He has commanded, Matt. 28, 20. Christ's own divine Word as set forth by the holy prophets and apostles in the Scriptures is the only saving truth, which the Christian Church should believe and proclaim. Gal. 1, 8: "But though we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." Eph. 2, 20: "And [)"e] are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets." In this manner Holy Scripture positively asserts that all teaching in the Christian Church should be nothing else than the teaching of God's Word. Negatively, Holy Scripture condemns the inculcation of human opinion in place of the Word of God by calling all those who insist upon teaching doctrine other than Christ teaches in Holy Scripture, antichrists. 1 John 2, 18: "As ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists"; v. 22: "Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is anti christ, that denieth the Father and the Son." The demand of modern rationalistic theology that the theologian must be given free scope to present his own theology is therefore thoroughly anti-Scriptural.

## b.
All Christians are commanded in clear and unmistakable terms to hear such teachers only as proclaim the Word of God in its complete truth and purity. All theologians who are disloyal to the "words of our Lord Jesus Christ" should be rejected as deceivers, ignoramuses, and enemies of the faith and must be avoided. 2 John 10: "If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him Godspeed." 1 Tim. 6, 3. 4 : "If any man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, . . . he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting." Rom. 16, 17: "Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them." These warnings apply not only to ministers of the Gospel, but also to theological professors, who have been called to instruct the future teachers and preachers of the Christian Church. Also their Christian call and profession requires of them that they be absolutely true to the Word of God in their whole ministry of teaching, John 8, 31. 32.

The disastrous consequences of academic freedom granted to ministers and theological professors are apparent in all churches where such freedom has been in vogue. As a result of this ungodly freedom we find in these denominations: 1) hopeless confusion in doctrine and endless wrangling concerning theological problems, by which these churches have been made to suffer complete disruption (e. g. the denominations in which Modernists and Fundamentalists are engaged in interminable controversy); 2) the absolute denial of the basic Christian truths taught in Holy Scripture, such as the divine inspiration of the Bible, the vicarious atonement of Christ, the justification of a sinner by grace, through faith, the resurrection of the dead, etc. Academic freedom resulted at once in "progressive theology," that is, in the liberalizing of theology according to the standards of human reason and modern science, until it has become thoroughly anti-Biblical. Present-day Modernism, which is the direct consequence of academic freedom, is a complete revolt against the sacred theology of God's Word and is in itself the rejection of Biblical Christianity.

The true Christian theologian rejoices in the possession of divine truth as offered in Holy Scripture, by which he has become free from every delusion and error. His constant endeavor is to make known to men bound and perishing in sin the saving and liberating truths of Christ, the divine Liberator of sin-lost men. Loyalty, obedience, and subjection to the Word of God constitute for him the supreme, glorious, and perfect liberty, which he must hold, guard, and protect against all odds. John 8, 36 : "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." It is for this reason that he so strenuously repudiates the academic freedom which unbelieving and unfaithful theologians now demand for themselves.