---
title: 4. IMMEDIATE RESULTS OF THE DIVINE IMAGE.
description: 
---

According to Scripture the immediate results of the divine image in man were a) immortality, b) dominion.

That Adam and Eve were created immortal is clear from Gen. 2, 17 ; Rom. 5, 12 ; 6, 23. Had they not sinned, they never would have died. Death was threatened them if they would become disobedient to their Creator. Whether they would have dwelled endlessly in Paradise, or whether God would have received them into heaven in His own time Scripture does not say. With respect to immortality we rightly distinguish between absolute and relative, or conditional, immortality. The former denotes absolute freedom from death and its destructive power, in which sense God, the angels, the human souls, and the bodies of the saints in heaven and of the damned in hell are immortal. The latter denotes freedom from the natural tendency to die, yet so that death could happen under a certain eventuality, in which sense man in the state of integrity was immortal. It is one thing not to be able to die, another to be able not to die, and still another not to be abl6 not to die. The first is said of the saints in heaven; the second, of Adam and Eve in their state of integrity; the third of all sinners after the Fall (Quenstedt).

Man's dominion over the creatures, according to Scripture, was an immediate result of his possession of the divine image (iustitia originalis concreata). The dominion of man must be regarded as real sovereignty, so that all the other creatures willingly rendered him service. After the Fall man possesses only a faint vestige of this absolute dominion (species dominii, nudus titulus dominii), since now he must apply force and cunning to control the creatures over which he endeavors to rule. The rebellion of the creatures against man is the direct consequence of his own rebellion against God, or of the loss of his concreated wisdom, holiness, and righteousness, and should continually remind him of the heinousness of sin and of the dreadfulness of its effects, Ps. 39,4-6.